<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>X</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-10" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</h2>
			<p>An apprentice to a mob of yeggs has to do the rough, unskilled work just as if he were learning a trade from any craftsman. I was sent out to get dynamite, caps, and fuse at a railroad construction camp, and returned with them safely. My next job was to go out and buy a number of twist drills. Johnnie hired a horse, bought a couple of blankets and a pair of overalls, and set off to look over the general store. The dynamite and drills were to be left near the store so they would be available in case they decided to “crush” into the jail and beat the box while serving their time.</p>
			<p>He returned in a week, very enthusiastic. The box looked good. There were guns and ammunition in the store. The jail was empty. There was a blacksmith shop where other necessary tools could be had, the town was dead at night. He had fitted keys to the padlocks on both the jail cells (all this would have been my work if I had not been known in the town), and had planted his “dan,” caps, and fuse safely near the jail. He had picked out another spot near the jail where the money was to be planted.</p>
			<p>Their plan was to buy tickets to the town nearest the one where I was arrested, on the same passenger train, then to get out and on the baggage, where the hostile constable would find them. I was given enough money to supply my wants till the business was over. They secreted the jail keys carefully in their shoes. The cautious Johnnie had also planted in the empty jail files and blank keys to be used in case they lost those they were carrying.</p>
			<p>“The only danger is,” said Sanc, “that some other bums may be picked up and thrown into this jail with us.”</p>
			<p>“In that case,” Johnnie replied, “we’ll have to do our ten days and crush right back in again and stay there till we can get the jail all to ourselves.”</p>
			<p>“Kid,” said Sanc, as they were leaving, “watch the papers. If it goes all right we’ll be back in about two weeks. If it goes wrong, and you never can tell, you will know from the papers what happened. Then send somebody up to the ‘stir’ to see George and he will tell you what to do.”</p>
			<p>Ten days later the burglary was reported in the papers. Four thousand dollars had been taken from the general store and the man hunt was on. The burglars had worked quietly. The theft was not discovered till opening-up time the next morning. The thieves were evidently experts, and left behind them the most complete set of safe-breaking tools seen in years, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> They had escaped by taking a hand car from the section house. It was found wrecked several miles down the railroad track.</p>
			<p>Johnnie and Sanc had strengthened their alibi and strangled any suspicion that might fall on them by taking the “John O’Brien”⁠—the bums’ term for hand car, so called because every other section boss in those days was named O’Brien⁠—and starting it down the railroad. There was a slight grade and it traveled several miles before jumping the track into the ditch, where it was found wrecked, “abandoned by the burglars.”</p>
			<p>The hunt started from there. Blanket stiffs looking for work were brought in, questioned, locked up for a day or two, and let go. The trains were searched up and down the line. Bums were brought in, got their ten days, but the burglars escaped and in a week the hue and cry was over. It was almost three weeks before the burglars showed up at Ogden. They were nervous and irritable, complaining that the jail had got uncomfortably filled up the last few days they were there. They got lousy from the blanket stiffs. The constable was sore about the burglary and wouldn’t square them for a ride into Salt Lake as he had done for me, and they had to pay their fare out of the town. Their money was almost gone, and there, in that little burg, was four thousand dollars that couldn’t be touched for at least a month, and somebody was liable to “steal” it on them. I got nervous, too.</p>
			<p>We decided to go up to Pocatello and kill the month around Salt Chunk Mary’s, where we would be safe and welcome, and where they could borrow enough money to live on until the time came to go after the four thousand. After a night’s ride we were welcomed by Mary, who spread the customary feed of beans and salt pork before us. She inquired anxiously about “Foot-and-a-half George.” She seemed to know every bum on the road of any consequence.</p>
			<p>Johnnie put in his time down in the jungle drinking with the bums. Sanc and I either watched the fine six-foot Indians that stalked about the town looking scornfully at their white inferiors, or the tinhorn gamblers who skinned the railroad men on pay days and each other afterward.</p>
			<p>Pay day was coming on and the town took on a busy aspect. Small-money gamblers appeared with their women companions. “Brass peddlers,” bums who sold imitation gold jewelry, principally rings, appeared on the streets with their ninety-cents-a-dozen gold “hoops” made in Wichita, Kansas, and “dropped” them to the Indian squaws and railroad laborers for any price from one dollar up. Other bums had bundles of pants and shoes planted in the jungle, the proceeds of a boxcar burglary on the Oregon Short Line. These articles were peddled openly about the railroad shops and to trainmen in the yards. A band of yeggs on their way to Great Falls and then to the “Canadian side” stopped off to thresh out their “soup” in the jungle.</p>
			<p>The “Johnson family” became so numerous that a “convention” must be held. In any well-ordered convention all persons of suspicious or doubtful intentions are thrown out at the start. When a bums’ “convention” is to be held, the jungle is first cleared of all outsiders such as “gay cats,” “dingbats,” “whangs,” “bindle stiffs,” “jungle buzzards,” and “scissors bills.” Conventions are not so popular in these droughty days. Formerly kegs of beer were rolled into the jungle and the “punks,” young bums, were sent for “mickies,” bottles of alcohol. “Mulligans” of chicken or beef were put to cooking on big fires. There was a general boiling up of clothes and there was shaving and sometimes haircutting.</p>
			<p>The yeggs threshed out their “soup” and prepared for the road. The “brass peddlers” compared notes and devised new stunts for “dropping” their wares. Traveling beggars, crippled in every conceivable manner, discussed the best “spots” for profitable begging. Beggars of this type are always welcomed at a “convention” or any other place where thieves or bums congregate.</p>
			<p>This may seem strange, but it’s a fact. The underworld beggars are the most reliable and trustworthy, the most self-sacrificing and the quickest to help of any class of people outside the pale of society. Crippled, wounded thieves, fugitives and escaping prisoners, if they know what they are about, always turn to the beggars for aid and are never refused. They are sheltered in the beggar’s humble “flop,” his small “plunge” (money he begs) is divided with them, and he carries messages any distance to their friends and relatives. The beggar minds his own business, settles his own feuds, and I cannot recall ever seeing one of them in court testifying against anybody for anything.</p>
			<p>This convention at Pocatello ended in a most unusual way. Nobody was killed, none of them fell in the fire. There was no fighting. When their “pennies” were all “slopped up,” and the food eaten, the bums folded their tents and stole silently away to their different activities.</p>
			<p>Sanc and Johnnie borrowed money from Mary and we went back to Ogden, where they prepared for their journey, horseback, after our coin.</p>
			<p>“Are you both going?” I asked.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” they answered without looking at each other. I wondered if each mistrusted the other, and if I would ever see either of them again, or any of the money.</p>
			<p>My fear of never seeing Sanc or Johnnie was groundless and a wrong to them. They returned within a week to the cheap lodging house where we quartered at Ogden. The four thousand was split in three equal parts. I was sent out with about seventy-five dollars in silver coin to lay off for paper or gold. They looked at me curiously as I stowed away my bit.</p>
			<p>“Top dough for you, isn’t it, kid?” said Sanc.</p>
			<p>“Yes, two hundred was the most I ever had. I didn’t expect to get one-third of this money. I doubt if I earned it. I took no chances. You two did all the work.”</p>
			<p>“We talked that over,” he replied, “and decided you were entitled to an even cut. It was your caper, you located it. You had the nerve to propose what we first thought was a bughouse caper. We are clean so far as the coppers are concerned. If we ever do any time for this we’ll have to plead guilty to it. The constable of that town would be our best witness if we got picked up on it. He would never admit that we could screw (key) out of his jail, beat that box, plant the coin, throw the jail screws in the creek, and go back and lock ourselves up. He might admit that it could happen to some other jail, but he will swear it couldn’t be done to his, see?</p>
			<p>“But here’s the main reason we gave you an even cut of the coin. From the way you stepped in Smiler’s case, and the way you took your jolt in the cooler at the ‘big house’ we know you are ‘right.’ If anything had gone wrong with this caper and we had to take a pinch, we figured you would have been a big help on the outside. That’s why you are declared ‘in and in’ with the works.</p>
			<p>“And now that we can lay off for a while, where will we go?” turning to Johnnie.</p>
			<p>“First,” said Johnnie, “we’ll go back to Pocatello and pay Mary. She told me she was going to Salt Lake soon to visit George at the ‘big house.’ I want to send a few dollars to some people there. The kid here wants to pay the hundred to Shorty that went to Judge Powers and the ten George gave him. You’ll probably want to send something, too. We can give it all to Mary and she’ll deliver it. While we’re there I’ll have her buy me a pair of ‘smoke wagons.’ No telling how soon I’ll be broke, and if I have a couple of guns I won’t be helpless. Then I’m going home for the winter, if nothing happens. When I got this last jolt I wrote and told my people I was going to Alaska for two years and they wouldn’t hear from me till I got back.</p>
			<p>“I go home now and then when I have a decent piece of money. My old people are both living, and I’ve got seven brothers and sisters. I bring them all something nice for presents, not that they need anything, but just to rub it into them. I am the youngest and always had to take the leavings. The first lock I ever busted was on the pantry in the kitchen of my old New Hampshire home, so far away.</p>
			<p>“Where are you going, kid?”</p>
			<p>“I’d like to stay with you people, but if you are going to split out, I’ll go to San Francisco for a while.”</p>
			<p>“You can go with me,” cut in Sanc. “I’m going to San Francisco for the winter. No New Hampshire winter for me.”</p>
			<p>I think the two of them were looking forward to a few months of quiet, peace, and maybe dissipation. My thoughts were running ahead to future burglaries. No thought of going home, even when Johnnie was telling of his home life. When I was hiding in the empty house covered with Smiler’s blood, I wanted to go home, because I was in a tough hole. Now I was safe, independent, the life fascinated me. No thought of home now.</p>
			<p>“What shall I do with the balance of the dynamite and drills?” I asked. “Somebody might step on the bundle and blow the house down. It’s planted out in the back.”</p>
			<p>“I’m going to meet George here in the spring when he gets out,” said Sanc. “It would save us the trouble of stealing more if we could plant it.” He was thoughtful for a minute.</p>
			<p>“Kid, in the morning you go up to the bank and rent a safety box for a year⁠—it’s about four dollars. Arrange with them to let any one into it that brings a key. Tell them there will be nothing of value there, just papers, and that you may want to send some one else after them and to let any one open it who comes with the key⁠—better get two keys. After you get the box arranged for, come down, get the ‘dan’ and ‘stems’ (drills), and put them safely away in the box. When you get the receipt for the box rent tear it up, throw the pieces away, and bring me the keys. I’ll plant them here in this joint somewhere where I can find them when I return.”</p>
			<p>Johnnie laughed. “Sanc, are you going to plant that stuff in the ‘jug’?”</p>
			<p>“Certainly, the bank will take good care of it and it won’t deteriorate. I’m not going to carry the box key around on my watch chain and put the receipt carefully away in my pocket. If I get snared by the bulls they won’t know I’ve got a safety box unless I snitch on myself, and if I were going to stay in this town my money would be in that box, too.”</p>
			<p>When the bank opened next morning I rented the box and was given two keys and a password, and was told that anybody bringing a key and the password would have access to the box. “Even if it’s a Chinaman,” said the attendant.</p>
			<p>The receipt was destroyed, and the stuff, in a neat parcel, put in the box. Sanc took the keys, planted them somewhere about the premises, and buried the password in his fertile mind.</p>
			<p>“Go down to the depot, kid, and get three tickets to Pocatello. We’ll all stay uptown till the train is ready to pull out. No good hanging around that depot, it’s lousy with bulls.”</p>
			<p>Johnnie was a typical knight of the road. He believed that beds were for sick people in hospitals, that room rent was wild extravagance, and paying fare on the railroad nothing but ostentatious spending. He protested.</p>
			<p>“Sanc, you’re not going to start paying fare?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, I am, and I’ll buy you a ticket to California if you’ll come. Just look at the pleasure you would have beating your way from there back to your home town in New Hampshire.”</p>
			<p>“That’s the funny part of it,” said Johnnie. “My home town is twenty miles off the railroad and I always have to pay fare on the stage going in and out.”</p>
			<p>Back at Pocatello we paid Mary the borrowed money, and spent some in her place for interest. She gladly undertook to deliver the money we wanted to go to our friends at the prison, and we gave it to her, capable woman that she was, feeling as sure they would get it as if we were doing it ourselves.</p>
			<p>Mary bought or sold anything crooked. Johnnie paid her for a couple of guns and gave her an address in Chicago to express them to. He could have bought them cheaper there, but in the matter of buying guns he was careful. Mary was square, and no matter what happened, she would not talk.</p>
			<p>“Be sure and get thirty-eight caliber, Mary,” he cautioned. “I won’t have any off calibers or strange make of guns. I want the kind that everybody else has. I don’t want to shoot anybody, but if I do they won’t dig a forty-one caliber slug out of him and find a forty-one caliber gun on me.”</p>
			<p>We parted at Pocatello, agreeing to “weigh in” (meet) at Ogden in the spring; Johnnie starting home, where he never arrived, and we to the Coast.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
